The top several diagrams really deal with exactly the kinds of things you'd expect to find in a literary man's copy of this difficult but very rewarding text.
Boudet records, for example, the form of a thunderbolt, which, as he says, you can see in ancient points.
He's interested in iconography.
He plots out rather rudely the form on the left of the Greek and on the right of the Roman theater mentioned by Vitruvius, trying to understand what the scene and the proscenium in the orchestra are, a subject on which, of course, scholars have beaten their heads against the archaeological evidence for centuries since his own time.
In other cases, his interest is more technical than historical.
On the bottom of the page, you see on the right, Goudet's note on the water wheel, which the Goudet describes.
The notes in the illustration are technical, not classical.
What's represented here, as the Latin text makes clear, the Latin text is a little hard to read, but what the Latin text makes clear is that this was not an ancient water wheel.
This was the water wheel that was built for the bridge of Notre Dame and Paris.
It's a piece of modern technology.
And in copying out this and other, other to call it, he describes the sockets used in the villas of Milne to carry rainwater away from walls.
He describes pumps and
pulleys used to build the new Paris in his own day.
He describes, from a passage which somehow fascinates me, the level Giocondo had invented, a long ruler with a bubble with a glass bubble in which a small bubble floated to show you whether the level was actually flat or not, just the sort of thing you might want to see Bob Doa using on this old hour, even apparently appearing here for the first time.
Now, in copying all of this material out there, Ruben makes two points clear to us, and they're both points that I think tend to be forgotten sometimes nowadays.
The first is that the sort of reading that Ruben and other scholars did was always a solitary activity.
When we think of the Renaissance scholar in his study, who's almost always his, we probably tend to imagine something like Dura St.
Jerome, a beautiful big room
Quiet, perfectly proportioned, with little-ledded windows, and the single erudite, bold, and bearded man at work, with no company except the odd lion sitting quietly at his feet.
Moudet, however, didn't always read this way.
He read in company when he needed to.
Had a technical expert yet.
Made his study into a site of collaboration.
And recent work by book historians like Bill Sherman and Alan Stewart in London has shown that this was by no means unusual, especially among royalty and aristocrats who often had a professional reader in their household who would interpret classical texts to them.
Essex, for example, blamed his reader, Henry Cuff, for misleading him to the revolt at the cost of his head.
an act which was seen as very unchivalrous.
You shouldn't blame your reader.
The second point that Vitruvius indicates is, I think, even more remarkable and even less likely to be noted in post-traditional times of scholarship.
We tend to think that in the Renaissance just now, verbal and visual culture were pretty separate, and classical studies and modern technology even wider apart.
Today, Vitruvius, and there are many, many parallels to it, which I won't cite here, but could cite eventually,
would suggest that these separations are modern ones which we import backwards.
And someone like Boudet read many of his texts for entirely practical ends.
Boudet was a builder.
He built himself a city house and a country house.
As a secretary of the king, he had major technological and architectural responsibilities.
And the way he prepared himself to carry these out is reading the best classical text in the light of the best modern experience.
This intense tight unity between the ancients and the modern in such technical areas in making these quarterbacks is something that's easy to forget in an age where it seems highly implausible.
Well, if the trubius mattered to the villa and garden builder and clay mattered to the bureaucrat, Homer mattered more than either to the classical scholar.
the greatest of Asian poets, whose work was so beautifully and completely preserved, which we made to simply buy in a rather good printed edition from 1488, printed in the Greek type we all wish they'd won on using, instead of the Greek type that Aldo and others made popular, just a magnificent book.
Boudet's notes on this are among the richest to be found in any of his books, and they're extraordinarily informative.
They enable us to see how he learned through Greek language in the first place,
measured the depth of his Greek scholarship, his version of Bonomos, and his human man behind the scholar.
How did you learn Greek when you were young, Lude?
Well, it wasn't easy.
There was one Greek in Paris, George Hermonimus, scribe and book dealer, who gave lessons.
Lude said long after in a letter, well, I started by getting hold of a certain Greek, but, you know, really, he got hold of me.
Anonymous taught Boudet to write the script, to pronounce it, stole him a lot of books, but couldn't actually interpret classical or biblical read in any modern language.
So he both sat down and taught himself Greek from the start.
And the book in Princeton actually lets us see how he did it.
You go back to the first page, you see on the right a whole series of not, I admit, highly legible marginal losses.
What these are are definitions, statements, for every difficult or unusual word in the Homeric chapter?
which he took from a very simple Byzantine school-like commentary on Homer and entered word by word by word in the first means of his text.
If you can imagine learning to read the German at the classical age of German literature by starting at scratch, taking a copy of Gertz's Faust part two in the school-boy dictionary, and teaching yourself the language by looking up each word as it occurs,
You take something as the measure Ude has achieved, and the mere fact that he actually learned to read this poem is absolutely extraordinary.
But he did much more than read it.
He read it with, for example, the greatest of all medieval Homeric commentaries, that of the 12th century scholar Eustavius of Thessalonica, which itself builds four fat volumes of his modern edition for the Iliad alone.
And he copied rich segments of that into the margins of his text, as he does on the right, even at this first page.
And he read other, rarer texts as well.
If you look at the left-hand image on page five of your handout,
At the first extensive note, this is actually a note of electrifying interest for anyone interested in the sense of manuscripts.
It's a famous passage in the beginning of Book Three of the Iliad, where Paris, whom we don't think of as a great warrior, seems to say, come on and fight to all the Greeks.
I'll take you all on.
Take you on one by one.
I'll take you on altogether.
It seems implausible.
We think of Paris as a lover, more than a fighter.
And we're not the first to think that way.
In the Alexandria Library, professional scholars like Aristarchus and Zomotitus, who edited the Homeric texts,
also found that the boasts of Paris attended against their sense of decor.
They entered by the line, in their official copies of the text, a horizontal line, and in their commentaries, they wrote notes in which they said, this line is appetized.
It is excised from the text when we read it and think about it, though not when we write it, because it violates literary viola.
This was what ancient scholarship was about in the Alexandrian Museum, walking at an employment, showing all the things that he'd done wrong from the standpoint of the more sophisticated, colonistic place of the Alexandrian Museum.
So far as classical scholarship goes, to this very moment,
No scholar knew anything about this until 1788, when the one manuscript, now in Venice, that records the Alexandrian's doings to the text of all that was published.
Boudin, in this note, and in many others scattered through his books, records these Alexandrian debates about the cutting of lines from the text of Homer.
He heard the ancestral voices of the first professional scholars in the West chanting about textual criticism more than two centuries before he's supposed to have done so.
How he made this plug into the party line of the classical tradition and part of the status, I have not yet been able to discover.
He never worked in the biblioteca much.
When he was in Venice, the books were still in crates anyhow.
He tried to get friends to spy out what was there and basically failed to do so.
When I gave a much more detailed lecture on this copy of Homer in Italy, an Italian period of time came up to me afterwards and said, that was very nice.
It's a shame you failed to find the Italian source that he must have been copying.
And she then gave me the signatures of two copies of the first edition of Homer, one in the Vatican, and one in Paris, which she assured me would contain the material we didn't use.
I'm happy to report that they didn't.
Where this and other notes come from, we do not know.
But what we do know is that this book also is a kind of dramatic crossroads in the movement of classical texts and material, a work of deep fascination to the technical scholar.
But it's not only fascinating from a standpoint of Greek philology.
Today's Homeric commentary, like this play,
show the man as well as the scholar.
And for helpiest reason, Jey was deeply committed to the classics.
The more humor he read, the more uneasy he felt about the way that Homer's heroes and God had with each other, promiscuous goddesses, irritable heroes who attacked their tongues.
How could you find good moral and pragmatic lessons here?
who they worried.
He ransacked his sources, and in an introductory text which came with Homer in the edition that he had, a work that he did in those days to Plutarch, he found his answer, which is right here, beside the case in the margin of the second text on the fifth page.
Plutarch says that the ancient poets had enhanced the higher truths they had to teach.
behind texts which would conceal him from profane eyes.
Only an allegorical interpretation which saw the poor beneath the husk would make it possible really to see what the Iliad and Odyssey were about.
He goes on to suggest a number of allegories which Boudet indeed went on to work out in detail in the margins of his copy and often to reuse in his own published works.
Now, this meant a great deal of Jude.
The way we know that, it's important to note that Jude's face.
I've looked at 50 books from Jude's library, and only one of them have I ever found the face used as a note.
It occurs in one of his copies of the Gospels in Cambridge University Library.
This rich lawyer put a face by Jesus' statement that it will be as easy for a camel to pass through the eye of the needle, for a rich man to enter the kingdom in heaven,
Once again, if you can crack the code and read the language, you can see under the Greek technicalities that's formed the margins of this book, a person struggling.
Now, critics of the study of marginal notes, and we have our critics like everyone else, often insist that marginal notes don't really record a reading.
They record that they are the more formal
whose superior record is an experience of contact with the text.
The more formal, the more elaborate, the more carefully written the notes, the sharper such criticism has to be.
I find this argument deeply problematic.
In principle, it seems that they have ideas that throw away the fullest evidence we have on the ground that it's not perfect, that it's not the evidence you might want, that we don't have Hickson's White House capes written as readers.
But I think it's worse than a council of despair.
It's also a piece of bad historical reasoning.
An anachronistic projection currently goes back into another world.
What is reading now?
When Sven Burkert set out to describe it in the Lindenburg Elegies, he assumed it was reading fiction now.
The intense, emotionally involved, probably canon pencil-less writing of a serious novel, and assumed that that was reading, and that, as he argues, was threatened by the rise of other forms of movements and communication with texts.
This seems to me to be flat wrong.
What we need to do is not to say, this isn't reading, because reading is what we do, but to say, reading then must be different from reading now.
That may seem a very simple proposition, but historians are simple beasts.
As you know, in the Reformation, works of supererogation were defined as those works which we couldn't carry out, which weren't essential to salvation.
Thinking is one of those for historians.
Now, it seems to me suggests actually a model of reading in the early 16th century, a model in which reading has at least two clear purposes, which are both unfamiliar to us, in addition to other literary purposes, which are probably familiar to us.
The first is documentary, even archival.
The reader confronted a text, a difficult, rewarding, demented classical text, expressed with it, interpreted it, and made that text not only a memory theater so he could use it, but also a memorial, a record of his own confrontation with the past, a record which was part of the documentation of his life and the life of his literary circle, as important a part of the documentation perhaps as his informal writing.
This kind of reading clearly begins with Petrarch, who, as the first Californian spirit that he was, confided to his magnificent copy of Virgil, the dates of his first encounter with Laura at her death of the plague some twenty years later.
It continues throughout the Italian Renaissance.
Angelo Lizziano, the philologist whose papers one day saw in Florence,
carefully dated his copies of printed books, registered the manuscripts with which he collated them, mentioned the sometimes August company in which he carried out this work.
The young Pietro Benvo, who as an old man gives the wonderful speech on love in the last book of Castiglione's Book of the Courtier, appears as a young man doing technical Latin philology with Luciano.
Uday, too, used his books to document his own achievement as a scholar, made them into an archive in the material environment of his scholarship.
As you see, for example, on the right hand of the left page, from the subscription to his film in which he records how Devani de Kondo had amended and restored his copy of Pliny from an ancient, a very ancient Parisian copy.
This kind of self-documentation is not what we think of reading as doing, but there's no reason to assume that you didn't think of that in the 15th and 16th century as much reason to think you did.
But Budet also wrote for another purpose, which I've already suggested more than once.
He wrote in Emulation of Clinton, he read in Emulation of Clinton,
He read to write.
He read to collect material.
But unlike Fleming, who read for substance, who collected material for his natural history, Lude read a bubble for style.
And the way we know this, I can't illustrate for you visually for reasons that become clear and sane.
It always bothered me that I had only Lude's books, only the books in which he raised the margins, because we all know that in the 15th, 15th, 17th centuries,
He didn't read, sitting back in an armchair with one book.
He read, and here I give you an illustration from Comanius' Morbus Pictus, sitting upright at a desk with a commonplace book, a solider book, into which he systematically entered excerpts from one of his readings.
It was long known that seven such books had been in Geneva in a private library in the 19th century.
In 1994, thanks to the intervention of some great source scholars, I was invited to the Fondational Art outside Geneva and walked in a bedroom for a week with those seven notebooks.
which are still, by the way, in a private library in Geneva, in fact, in the library of one or two days descendants.
Despite the tendency to hyper-mentalate continually and sleep deprivation, I was able to go through all 2,000 pages.
These surviving notebooks are the fragments of an enormous reprocessing system, the tip of a lost iceberg.
For one thing, they don't contain any notes on Petruvius or hardly any notes on Homer.
Yet I'm sure that these books were also reprocessed like others.
What they do contain is a fascinating, color-coded, elaborate system breaking every classical text down into blocks that Boudet himself could reuse in his own writing, flattened in Greek.
Every time he notes a word or a phrase, he notes how you can use it again.
So one of his rare, when he was talking about the adjective, having a hundred hands, he says, we can use this talking about a vocacious paper.
So in addition to the books, there was, in Mude's practice study, an enormous systematic notebook system.
in which he digested and filed and reprocessed everything that he read in order to perfect his style.
Not that most of his readers would agree that a quick dip in the brackish borders of his Latin is really too refreshing.
I would suspect, though the Sevens arrived in no post-unconfirmed, that there was a second set at large for content.
So lost but barely visible behind the screen of imperfect transmission.
is an extraordinary system in which reading and reading are tightly interlocked, in which one read to write, a way of reading less like what we now think of as reading, I think in the way reporters read, taking from Lexis material from agency copy and rewriting it more or less into something original before sending it out again, a kind of reading with which we may become familiar in the future.
Boudet's books, in other words, offer challenges of many times.
To normal ways of storing and studying Renaissance books, to standard assumptions about the experience of pre-modern readers, to the ill-considered efforts of my critics to remove the complex idiosyncratic evidence of marginal notes from the overview of historians of the book.
They offer fascinating middle-range information about the intellectual history of Renaissance.
They don't use plenty of information
I think, explain in a very neat, microscopic way, like a fine illumination, with dilemmas that were launched in the Northern Renaissance until they exploded in their later time.
Above all, though, they do what the best historical evidence you can find anywhere does.
They draw the senses through the flesh and the body.
One last example.
Commissaires of Boudet tend to think of him as a pretty crossword, dignified gentleman.
When a servant entered his study one day to inform him that his house was on fire, he replied, my compliments to Madame Boudet.
Kindly tell her that domestic affairs are her concern.
He shut the door and went on greeting.
As neat an application of the doctrine of separate spheres as I've ever encountered.
But Boudet had more tender moments too, and one of them occurs precisely in his copy of Homer.
In one of the introductory texts to Homer, there's a fabulous anecdote about how the blind poet encounters some priestesses sacrificing.
He asks what god they're sacrificing to, and the head priestess refuses to tell them, and says, man, go away from our rights.
Homer curses her.
In future, he says, may you no longer love scalp-strong young men.
May you love only men with gray hair, weak knees, dribbling chin, old men.
and goes on his way.
Boudet, when he read these lines, was in later middle age and about to marry a 14-year-old girl.
It's not surprising that, though it is quite wonderful, that he wrote, mark these verses.
Boudet turned to his books and wrote them and did so in discreet grief, not just for the information they could offer him, because they were his best confidence,
his fondest advisors, his closest friends, even if his conversations with them could take place only on paper and in the peace of security of an ancient language.
For me, the history of reading performs no more rewarding service than enabling us to eavesdrop on close encounters of this language kind.
Thank you.
That was terrific.
That was really good.
Will these generally be published in the...